# Portfolio

## Project Goals
In this project I will learn how to import data into R and then clean that data into a readable and usable format utilizing data cleaning techniques and modifying the data for the specified task.  I will use statistical methods to generate new data based on parameters given.  My goal is to utilize simulations and bootstrapping in R to generate this new data set using a monte carlo simulation.  I will import this data from my work's database and then isolate certain fields or columns to fulfill the requirements.  Once I have the new generated data set, I will perform further analysis on it to see if it is truly random such as generating summaries of the data to see if it is skewing towards one variable or result.  I will also check the new data to be sure it is in a readable and usable format that can be used for application development and testing.  Documentation and commenting in this file will be something I will do so this process can be replicated and reused later if need be so the future programmer can understand my thought process and why I chose some paths.  This of course will be because the R program is written in a clean and efficient way and will have supporting documentation alongside it to further assist the future programmer.  

## Things that I am nervous about
I am excited to start this as it will be a good first step into my career as a data scientist but I also worry I bit off more than I can chew because I have never used a Monte Carlo simulation nor do I fully understand the math behind it.  The fact that it's also in R does make me slightly nervous because I am still learning this program and how to fully utilize it.  I did find quite a bit of supporting material to assist me in tackling a Monte Carlo in R.  The other challenge is working with the data set my company has provided me as I am not fully familiar with the health parameters since this is another department I have never worked with.  I am still excited to do this as I have always desired to do more statistical work with data in my career.  I foresee this as a great start and addition to my portfolio.


## **BIG GOALS**
My big goals for this project is to have something I can point to employers or other professionals as a good milestone or marker for my skills in R.  To also get more experience, wrangling, cleaning and modifying data in R, and then doing the analysis in it.  And become familiar enough with R that I feel confident putting it on my resume and then utilizing it in a day to day career.
